whoo how would you feel if one of the
most prominent vegan leaders in the
world was going around saying that he
had magically cured an incurable disease
through his vegan diet
well actually this isn't entirely new
sadly especially within the world of raw
food gurus and diet gurus generally
ridiculous claims have been made about
that at almost every stage of the sad
little history of our movement one day I
hope veganism is gonna be on the
bookshelf next to the the great social
movements in history but not today and
you know people like durianrider and
Frehley they're as much victims of the
unrealistic expectations that other
people place on them as they are victims
of the unrealistic expectations they
place on themselves my view of the two
of them actually is moderate you may
think I'm angrily denouncing them or
that I'm disappointed with them but I'm
not and one of the reasons for that is
that I'm not an ex follower I never had
a period of my life before where I
believed in these people or looked up to
them or practice their diet and then was
later disappointed people who have been
through that experience tend to feel
much more strongly about it and have
resentment and hurt feelings and so on
however there are two issues gonna be
broached in this video relatively
quickly the first is you might as well
get out of the way durianrider is a guy
who has both claimed to be diagnosed
with Crohn's disease and to be diagnosed
as having been cured of Crohn's that he
cured it or he stated that he could be
so that's a this is just as absurd I
mean anyone if you haven't looked at the
Wikipedia article on Crohn's disease
it's not hard to educate yourself a
little bit about the nature of this
disease I knew one person in my life
with Crohn's disease I was talking to
another vegan youtuber about this he
also he knew just one person I think
when he was in school if you've known
someone with it it is a terror
flying very serious disease and morally
speaking to falsely claim that you have
the disease or to falsely claim that
you've cured the disease is just as low
as to falsely claim that you have AIDS
or to falsely claim that you've cured
AIDS
nobody has cured Crohn's disease if
somebody really was the first person in
the world to cure the disease by eating
a lot of bananas that would be a major
landmark in the history of science and
there'd be new research done on it for
the same reasons that if someone cured
AIDS by eating bananas it would be a
huge landmark of history science that is
really impossible and the other truth is
that sometimes durianrider has said that
yes he absolutely was diagnosed
medically with Crohn's disease and
sometimes he has said the exact opposite
so I'm gonna play you a very short
quotation here of what durianrider said
an interview with a guy called rich roll
if you don't know him he runs a podcast
that sometimes talks about veganism and
other stuff so here is durianrider his
own voice in his own words talking to
rich roll about this I mean what were
the doctors telling you when you would
go in for you know stuff revolving
around having Crohn's they just said to
my mom that I was making stuff up and
things like that
the asthma they could tell had the
asthma of stuff so they're getting
steroidal medication things like that
but the digestive system was often odd I
wouldn't go in anyway because I was too
embarrassed to talk about it but
occasionally when I did go in they did
x-rays and staff and got me to consume
its radioactive stuff they just said I
work that we can't afford anything miss
Johnson I think it's sad it's gonna be
the imagination going on oh so they
didn't even believe that you had it
correct Wow
so how did you finally figure out that
that's what you have I mean you couldn't
have self diagnosed yourself with
Crohn's at that age did you or else what
was going on
that was only when I basically got over
it that I worked out without sauce
what's happening so look at the symptoms
so there there are some elements of that
story that are all too human and all too
believable and I think anyone who hears
that and compares what durianrider says
now to what during writer said before if
they had choose is he lying now or is he
lying before in this podcast I think
most people would surmise that during
writer was telling the truth or most of
the truth in this interview with ritual
and that he's been lying in more recent
videos where he claims to both have been
diagnosed with Crohn's disease and to
have been cured from it and to appeared
himself miraculously with his diet there
are a few things that ring true in that
are sad and I sympathize the guy it's a
sad story but he says in that interview
both that the doctors did not believe he
had Crohn's seeds they concluded he did
not have Crohn's disease and also that
they concluded that he was a liar or
that he was untrustworthy now that is
very sad for a young person to deal with
and durianrider has been open about the
fact that he has mental health problems
and he has a lot of animosity towards
the medical establishment so again these
things fit together and I'm not here
heaping scorn on him and saying he's the
worst person in the world you could
already see there an etiology a series
of causes for why durianrider acts the
way he does around exactly these issues
including the over-the-top hysteria
about steroids and steroidal medication
over-the-top claims about the medical
establishment and how they can't really
cure anything
etc and over-the-top claims about how
his vegan diet has changed his life I am
on one level if you met someone like
that who wasn't in a position of power
or influence you would just be happy for
them you just say great great man you
know I'm glad you quit drugs I'm glad
you quit alcohol I'm glad you improved
your diet
I'm glad you became
you know an athlete I'm happy for you
and like I've I've got a long list of
brothers and sisters if any one of them
turned their lives around the way during
mother did I would be so happy for them
I would say good for you I'm so happy
you quit drinking quit all this other
stuff I'm so happy or now vegan and
enthusiast what we're riding a bicycle
and everything else and I wish I was in
a situation where I could just be happy
for a durianrider if he was a bit more
of a mensch about these things we could
all just be happy for him
but he's not he's constantly attacking
other people insulting other people
causing ridiculous levels of conflicts
denouncing people who could be his
allies and his friends and you know he
makes pseudo-scientific and false claims
that are as damaging to veganism as you
know faith healers claiming that they
can cure cancer or cure AIDS or anything
else now uh his partner-in-crime
is freely who again is one of the most
influential people in veganism near 2016
as I say I really hope every time I talk
about these guys I hope it's the last
video ever make they have been very
influential the last few years but I do
feel they've jumped the shark partly
because they have nothing new to say I
said to to Hannah and Jason at one point
this was not on camera this is not a
recorded interview but I said to them
you know that I felt you freelee and
durianrider should be desperate for
their support to cooperate with them the
freely into her should be desperate to
cooperate with people okay Jason and
they were very surprised that I said
they said what you know what are you
talking about I said well you know you
can't build a social movement on a guy
sitting on the the floor of his kitchen
ranting incoherently about steroids
again
you know we've heard it before what
these two have to say they've said it
again and again they've said it on the
news they've said it in the newspapers
they've said it on their blog they've
said it on in videos and for them you
know repeating that same message again
again is in some ways the meaning of
life you know I guess I can sympathize I
can sympathize up to a point but you
know apart from the fact that they're
constantly alienating people it would be
their supporters something I've talked
about a great deal on this channel
there's also just the reality of
repetition it doesn't have the same
meaning the second time the fifth time
the tenth time you've done it and it
doesn't have the same meaning when
they're making mistakes they're saying
things that are factually wrong and
scientifically untrue and that's already
been pointed out to them you know
they're not making the mistake for the
first time they're choosing to continue
preaching something that I think they
know to be false or at least they know
that other people have taken the time to
really set out the facts and prove that
it's false
now another theme addressed in this
channel is the question of what
credentials does freely have if you
search for freely credentials in this
channel or each you'll probably find
that video and I mentioned there that
although freely vaguely mentions that
she has an advanced certificate
nutrition she always avoided saying what
institution it was from then it had
different reflection of this now this
links up to the the the broader themes
that was just talking about let's play a
quotation of freely Zone voice finally
letting the cat out of the bag and
telling us where indeed her credentials
come from so I have conventional
certification in nutrition but I don't
use that training at all anymore because
it's so heavily funded by the meat and
dairy industry that the information is
just incorrect education do you have
freely so I also have certification in
nutrition so advanced advanced
civilization from the Australian
Institute of fitness okay so
so there it is the Australian Institute
of fitness now if you do a five-minute
google search here's the here's the
importance of really checking your facts
checking your sources if you do a
five-minute Google search you might jump
to the conclusion that she's lying and I
don't I don't think she is that's why I
mentioned that up front here because the
Australia Institute of fitness does not
offer a certificate in advanced
nutrition such that they don't have a
certificate of that name and when I saw
that I thought oh they've probably
changed their program since Frehley was
a student there and I think that's right
now the question I broadly asked in the
past well you know stiffy can mean
anything I compared this to my own
experience you know my own credentials
questions people ask me about what kind
of education I've got whether or not I'm
an expert and this that or the other
thing it's something many many people
have to deal with who have
unconventional credentials confusing
credentials etc so I do sympathise and
also look I'm going to put something
else out there the program based on what
I know about it because I did some
research into the current program
offered at the Australian Institute of
fitness in diet and nutrition if I could
take that program here in Canada you
know what I probably would I might have
taken it last year or something depend
on how busy I was but I don't know how
much it cost the session one thing I
didn't look into I don't know how much
money it cost but um sure I mean in a
sense even though I do not see this as
equal to being a medical doctor or a
research scientist you're definitely not
equal to a dietician a retic you know
registered real dietician um you
probably can learn a lot in a program
like this and I'm not insulting freely
or dismissing her her credentials
entirely on the contrary freely is I
think it's prone Frehley repeatedly says
you know a piece of paper and it means
nothing I think on the contrary you can
learn a lot getting a certificate in in
diet you can learn a lot more in a
formal university program studying the
science and nutrition or Dietetics
so I got the following message back from
the Australian students I wrote to them
asking about this program you were
inquiring about the nutrition coach
program this program is a new program
that opened last year 2015 this is
something we have never done before as
we have only focused on personal
training massage and business let us
pause there
the Australian Institute is is not a
university it's very obvious if you look
at their website that 90% of what they
do is training people to be fitness
instructors gym gym employees and to
some extent to be managed management of
gyms so if you if you just read this far
again you might jump to the conclusion
that freely is lying I actually don't
think she is lying however yeah the
institution does not fill one with
confidence but I continue the nutrition
program will run for 17 weeks this is a
blended program and will be delivered
online and face to face once a month you
would need to head over to Canberra to
do your one day on campus face to face
tutorial pause so to be clear it's a 17
week program you spend almost all of the
time at home with your computer reading
things on the Internet
I assume using some web interface to
send in some homework to prove that
you're doing the reading I hope and once
a month one day a month you do appear in
person on campus could be an excellent
program could be that people learned a
lot if it's a really well-run program in
17 weeks I would say you could learn as
much as one year at a real university
could be I would generously say that you
could learn as much as someone would
learn in one year studying full-time in
university campus however you definitely
cannot learn as much as someone in four
years on a university campus and in
Canada for example being a registered
dietician takes more
than for years it can take as much as
five years if you're really well
organized you already have a BA in
another subject you can shave it down
but you are talking about four year
programs followed by a practicum
followed by special special programs
after you complete a BA in science and
nutrition so being a registered
dietician or getting just a bachelor's
degree in nutrition is much much much
more education than what Frehley did but
nevertheless this nutrition coaching
program as I said if I had the option
have had the opportunity I would
consider getting this myself in Canada
and I would not consider burning through
four or five years of my life getting a
full certification as a as a
nutritionist or dietitian you know a ba
program so probably a good thing for
some people so this is the part that
confirms for me that I don't think
freely is lying the reply from
Australian Institute of fitness
continues both courses may share the
similar content but they are both a
certification and has both branded
differently I feel this course is from a
different provide hence the different
name
close quote so there are some
grammatical errors in that paragraph
from the Australian state of fitness
they are not the Australian Institute of
spelling and grammar however I think the
point there is she saying both courses I
asked specifically the nutrition coach
program is that the same as the advanced
certificate in nutrition so without
naming it I think there her point is
that basically yes this is the same
program but it is branded differently
obviously will be completely identical
but this is probably representative of
the type of certification it really has
okay guys so let's wrap it all up with a
bow below this video you are going to
find a link to a webpage that is called
the ugly truth
about Harley durianrider Johnstone if
you do a google search if you don't find
the link if you do a Google search for
the ugly truth about durianrider I'm
pretty sure you will find this page and
this comes back to the the fundamental
problem of pseudoscience abuse of
authority the role of leadership of
these people in veganism today there are
many embarrassing stimulating and
interesting facts about durianrider on
this web page including his alleged
history of making death threats against
people which people I know have told me
about people I know have told me that
during writer has made death threats
against them his pattern of threatening
to beat people up his pattern of
boasting and making kind of unrealistic
and impossible claims of himself but of
all the things on this page what I
really want to draw your attention to
instead is just a set of links to their
own website to the website that
durianrider and freely created 30
bananas a day there's a series of links
to people trying to discuss the problem
of weight gain on the diet they were
gaining weight and that went under these
forums to discuss it now as as this guy
Anthony colpo explains after he posted
this set of links just showing look the
diet doesn't work for everyone and there
is no diet that works for everyone again
it would be so much easier to sympathize
with freelee and durianrider if they
were just reasonable about these things
but they are unreasonable in the extreme
I've talked with us in the past if you
say using caffeine will help you lose
weight it does for some people it's not
healthy it's not advisable it's not
ideal but there are some people
absolutely swear by the use of caffeine
to lose weight and it has been
scientifically studied etc I'm not
telling you to use caffeine I'm anti
caffeine I made a separate video on that
why I don't use any caffeine or why I
avoid using caffeine I try to use zero
as close to zero as possible um
but nobody can easily say about any diet
that it works for everyone and there's a
long list of reasons why that is if you
are inclined to be reasonable but these
links to people trying to discuss
honestly and openly the fact that the
diet didn't work for them that they
gained weight on 30 bananas a day raw
tell for that they gain weight in the
diet promoted by freelee and durianrider
those links today lead to a dead end
because those discussions were deleted
ok in terms of the sciences the most
unpopular and dubious of the sciences
are the social sciences
but they still are sciences and you know
even if you're just working with
anecdotal evidence even if you're just
working with the fact that you need
people and chat with people casually and
they tell you that the diet's working
great one of the worst things you can do
is delete evidence to the contrary when
you do that you destroy the credibility
of all the anecdotal evidence you have
even if it is just anecdotal evidence a
lot of things that we have in our lives
rely on anecdotal evidence I'm gonna
give you one example for my own life
really quickly a lot of my life has to
do with studying languages when people
ask me about language program at my
university and here in Canada now my
current university I say it's a really
bad language program if they ask why
I'll give them some reasons why
depends on how interesting they are
sorry depends on how interested they are
if they want to hear it or not
um that's what I say if I say that it's
anecdotal a couple of weeks ago I was
getting on the bus and a younger guy who
knows me he's in his last year of
university here but he's younger than I
am he starts talking to me about the
language program and I said you know I
think it's a really bad program I didn't
say much about at that moment I said
well you know
he replied by saying he thought the
program was really good and I said oh
well that's interesting but I mean let
me tell you something in my first year
of studying Japanese and in my first
year of studying Chinese the only spoken
exercise I did the only exercise
involving speaking the language was the
final oral exam the exam during the last
week of classes approximately and what I
said that he immediately laughed out
loud he laughed in a good-natured way
and he said yeah you're right you know
what those courses are absolutely
terrible and he said some things about
why he thought the course terrible he
said and he reflected he said what he
was really thinking about were the
courses on literature which are more
advanced courses and our it's taught a
different way there's not really the
language courses those are studying
history literature I mean so right there
you gave an example of the kind of
nuance you need even in just collecting
anecdotal evidence
I did research in Cambodia we're talking
about aspects of the healthcare system
do they work or do they not work someone
can tell you off hey I've had look this
healthcare program is terrible it killed
my son you've got to sit down and in a
sensitive way without offending the
person without having them get angry at
you or shut up
you now have to probe for one thing they
could just be lying to you it could be
their son is still alive he's not dead
but it's very likely I mean this
situation this is a real example I dealt
with okay somehow their son died from
medical malpractice from medical
accident now I've got to figure out
enough about the circumstances without
offending this person you know the
specific program that we're studying was
that at fault was it just a specific
doctor at fault is there something I can
learn from this about how this program
really works so again anecdotal evidence
matters is this a good university
program or a bad university program is
this a good medical system I was dealing
with specific aspects of the medical
system not going to describe it here not
the whole system in general
can't boy everyone knows this system as
a whole was pretty bad but what can we
do to improve the way the the medical
system works in Cambodia and you know
and the question of does a diet work and
will this diet work for you will it work
for the type of person you are on your
schedule with your needs with your
particular health conditions etc yeah in
real life we often do rely on anecdotal
evidence there's a lot worth knowing in
that article the ugly truth about
durianrider
but to me the most crucial thing I want
you to feel the depth of this is a guy
who lied about having Crohn's disease
and he's lying now about being cured of
his Crohn's disease and this is a guy
who responded to people honestly
reporting that they were gaining weight
not losing weight on 3000 calories a day
etc and he destroyed that evidence he
covered it up and that doesn't wash off